Adding graph formats
====================


.. currentmodule:: linchemin.cgu.translate

The :mod:`~linchemin.cgu.translate` module stores all the classes and functions to make translation between
graph formats and if you are planning to include a new format, this is the module you will need to modify.
Below we firstly give a brief description of the module architecture and then we show a practical example
for including a new input format and one for including an output format.


Translate overview
-------------------


The module is composed by a factory structure in which the subclasses of the abstract class
:class:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator` implement the concrete translators for each format,
so that, for example, there is a ``TranslatorNetworkx``, a ``TranslatorIbm``, a ``TranslatorBipartiteSynGraph``,
etc... For each subclass the concrete implementation of at least one of two abstract methods
:meth:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator.from_iron` and
:meth:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator.to_iron` is developed.
The :class:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.TranslatorFactory` class handles the calls to the correct ``AbsTranslator``
subclasses based on the user's input.

On the top of the factory there is a chain of responsibility structure that enforces a sequence of translations
from the selected input format to the output format. The steps of the sequence are:

- Input format is translated to Iron
- Iron is translated to SynGraph in the selected data model
- SynGraph is translated to Iron
- Iron is translated to the output format

Forcing the translation to pass through SynGraph ensures that the chemical information is handled
correctly, as :class:`~linchemin.cheminfo.molecule.Molecule` and/or
:class:`~linchemin.cheminfo.reaction.ChemicalEquation` instances are built while constructing
the SynGraph objects. Moreover, the conversion between data models (i.e., bipartite graph, monopartite
graph with only reactions or monopartite graph with only molecules) is handled exclusively by
SynGraph. This avoids the combinatorial explosion of possibilities to mix and match
data formats and data models.

Lastly, everything is wrapped by the facade function :func:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.translator`.
It takes the 'name' of the input format, the graph object in the input format,
the 'name' of the output format and the 'name' of the output data model and returns the graph
translated in the output format and in the selected data model.


Implementing a new input format
-------------------------------

In order to include a new input format among those that LinChemIn can 'read', you
firstly need to create a new subclass of the abstract class
:class:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator` in the :mod:`~linchemin.cgu.translate` module.

.. code-block:: python

    class TranslatorNewInputFormat(AbsTranslator):
    """ Translator subclass to handle translations from NewInputFormat objects """
        as_input = None
        as_output = None

        def from_iron(self, graph: Iron):
            pass

        def to_iron(self, route) -> Iron:
            pass

What you are interested in is the :meth:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator.to_iron` method, while the
:meth:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator.from_iron` can be left aside for the moment.

Now you need to take your time to develop the actual code that, starting from a graph object
in the format you are trying to add, returns an Iron instance. We recommend to add a 'node_smiles'
key in the ``properties`` dictionary of the Iron nodes, so that the Iron object is suitable
to be translated into a SynGraph instance. Also, remember that the translators work with single graph
objects, not list of objects.
If you need more information regarding the Iron format, you can have a look at :doc:`../data_structure`.
You should also set the ``as_input`` attribute of the subclass to ``implemented``, so that
the new format will appear as available in the helper function.


When the code will be implemented you will have something similar
to this:

.. code-block:: python

    class TranslatorNewInputFormat(AbsTranslator):
    """ Translator subclass to handle translations from NewInputFormat objects """
        as_input = 'implemented'
        as_output = None

        def from_iron(self, graph: Iron):
            pass

        def to_iron(self, route) -> Iron:
            # some super cool code
            return iron_graph

The last step is to add the 'name' of your new format in the ``translators`` dictionary
of :class:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.TranslatorFactory`, to make it available to the factory.

.. code-block:: python

    translators = {
        'networkx': {'value': TranslatorNetworkx, 'info': 'Translating from/into Networkx objects'},
        'pydot': {'value': TranslatorDot, 'info': 'Translating from/into Pydot objects'},
        'ibm_retro': {'value': TranslatorIbm, 'info': 'Translating from outputs generated by the IBMRXN CASP tool'},
        'az_retro': {'value': TranslatorAz,
                     'info': 'Translating from outputs generated by the AiZynthFinder CASP tool'},
        'mit_retro': {'value': TranslatorMit,
                     'info': 'Translating from outputs generated by the Askos CASP tool'},
        'syngraph': {'value': None,
                     'info': 'Translating from/into SynGraph objects'},
        'pydot_visualization': {'value': TranslatorDotVisualization,
                                'info': 'Creates PNG pictures of the input routes'},
        'iron': {'value': None, 'info': 'Translating from/into a list of Iron objects'},
        'noc': {'value': TranslatorNOC,
                'info': 'Translating to a format compatible with a Network of Organic Chemistry'},
        'new_input': {'value': TranslatorNewInputFormat,
                      'info': 'Brief description that will appear in the helper function'}
    }

That's it, you are all done! Now your newly developed format is available to all the LinChemin
functionalities that use the
:func:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.translator` function. For example, you can use it to translate a
single route with the :func:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.translator` function:

.. code-block:: python

    from linchemin.cgu.translate import translator

    syngraph = translator('new_input', new_input_graph, 'syngraph', 'bipartite')


or you can work with a list of routes through the :func:`~linchemin.interfaces.facade.facade` function.

.. code-block:: python

    from linchemin.interfaces.facade import facade

    routes, metadata = facade('translate', 'new_input', new_input_graph, 'syngraph', 'bipartite')


Implementing a new output format
---------------------------------

The procedure to add a new output format is the same as the one described above,
with the only difference that you now need to implement the
:meth:`~linchemin.cgu.translate.AbsTranslator.from_iron` method.
In this case, your code should take an Iron instance as input and, after the appropriate transformations,
return a graph object in the new format.

.. code-block:: python

    class TranslatorNewOutputFormat(AbsTranslator):
    """ Translator subclass to handle translations from NewOutputFormat objects """
        as_input = None
        as_output = 'implemented'

        def from_iron(self, graph: Iron):
            # some super cool code
            return graph

        def to_iron(self, route) -> Iron:
            pass

Of course, if you want that your format is available as both input and output,
you will need to implement both methods and to set as ``'implemented'`` both the
``as_input`` and ``as_output`` attributes.
